(ON CUE)
Carnegie Hall in New York City, the home of the world's greatest musical events.
Today's event is one in a series of New York Philharmonic Young People's Concerts
under the musical direction of Leonard Bernstein.
(ON CUE . .) and here is Mr. Bernstein.
Gimme that spray.
The kind that you spray.
Oh, there's no time?
No time?
Alright then.
Okay
O.K., now what do you think that music's all about?
Can you tell me?
That's just what I thought you'd say.....
cowboys, bandits, horses, the wild west
I know my little daughter Jamie who's five years old and who's sitting up there agrees with you.
When she heard me play this piece, she said -
"Ooo the Lone Ranger song, Hi-ho Silver!"
Well, I hate to disappoint her,
and you too,
but it really isn't about the Lone Ranger at all.
It's about notes -
E Flats and F sharps.
You see, no matter how many times people tell you stories about what music means,
forget them.
Stories are not what the music means ab-at all.
Music is never about anything.
Music just is.
Music is notes; Beautiful notes and sounds put together in such a way that we get pleasure out of listening to them,
that's all there is to it.
And when we ask "What does it mean -
what does this piece of music mean?",
then we're asking a very hard question.
And that's the question we're going to try to answer today.
Now:
It's a funny thing about this meaning business -
in music, anyway.
When you say "What does it mean?",
you're really saying is
"What is it trying to tell me?",
"What ideas
does it make me have?".
Just like words;
when you hear words, you get ideas from them.
If I say to you
"Ow, I burned my finger!",
then immediately you get an idea from what I said or some ideas you get
the idea that I burned my finger,
that it hurts,
that I might not be able to play the piano any more,
or that I have a loud ugly voice when I scream -
lots of different ideas like that.
That's words.
But if I play you notes
just notes on the piano like that-
those notes don't tell you any ideas;
those notes aren't about burning your finger,
or sputniks, or lampshades,
or rockets, or anything.
Well what ARE they about?
They're about music.
For instance,
take this piece by Chopin.
Beautiful, isn't it?
But what's it about?
Nothing.
Or take this Beethoven Sonata-
it's not about anything, either.
Or take this piece of boogie-woogie.
It's not about anything either.
They're NONE of them about anything!
But they're all fun to listen to.
Why should they be fun to listen to?
I don't know it's just,
part of human nature to like to listen to music.
You see, notes aren't like words at all.
Because if I say even one single word all by itself to you,
like "rocket",
immediately you have an idea you see a picture in your mind.
Rocket: Bang! Picture.
But if I play a note; one note all alone,
that means nothing.
It's just a plain old F sharp or a B flat.
A sound, that's all, higher or lower,
louder or softer - a sound that can seem very different
if I play it,
or I sing it
or if an oboe plays it
or if a xylophone plays it
or if a trombone plays it
Very different.
It's all the same note -
only with a different sound.